FIVE PRESENT SPORT HEROES


1. Anthony Joshua 

British Nigerian boxer, Anthony Oluwafemi Olaseni Joshua, is definitely the biggest Nigerian personality this year, he had a good 2020. Despite a defeat to Andy Ruiz Jr. in 2019, he bounced back and stunned his opponent with a remarkable win in the 

rematch at Saudi Arabia late last year, it was also reported that he won a staggering £46 million and has an outstanding net worth of $80 million. AJ retained his WBA, WBO and IBF heavyweight titles in December 2020, as he defeated Kubrat Pulev in 

Wembley and he earned £6-10 million. The Ring Magazine and Transactional Boxing Rankings Board in April 2020 ranked Anthony Joshua as the world’s second-best active heavyweight. Joshua has some tremendous endorsement deals with Under Armour, 

Jaguar, Altitude Mask, StubHub, Sky Sports, Beats by Dre, AJ Elite Series, Lynx, BXR Gym, Lucozade, Texo Construction, Dafabet, Audemars Piguet, British Airways, Hugo Boss. AJ left Showtime in 2018 and got a massive deal of 1 billion dollars between his 

promoter, Matchroom Sports, and streaming service DAZN. 

 

2. Israel Adesanya 

Nigerian-born New Zealand professional mixed martial artist, Israel Oluwafemi Owolabi Adesanya alias “The Last Stylebender,” also had an incredible 2020. He defended his title for the first time in March, where he defeated Yoel Romero, and earned over 

$540,000. He also defeated Paulo Costa in September, and earned up to $600,000. This win brought him his fifth Performance of the Night award. With his win against Paulo Costa, he maintained his undefeated record of 20 wins. His 2020 was summed up 

as he emerged the winner of MMA’s ‘International Fighter of the Year’ award. Adesanya has a net worth of approximately $2 million (£1.6m). He has an endorsement deal with Peak milk and also has a clothing line of his own called “Engage.” 

 

3. Victor Osimhen 

Naples and Nigerian footballer, Victor James Osimhen, rose to stardom last year when he moved from Lille to Napoli for a staggering €71.2 million with a further €10.1million add-on summing up the fee to €81.3million; this makes him the most expensive African 

in history. He had a hand in 24 goals for Lille where he had 18 goals and six assists in 38 appearances in all competitions. He won Lille’s player of the season award and went on to win the Marc-Vivien Foe prize given to the best African player in Ligue 1. 

He has also set the pace in Napoli, having a hand in three goals for the Naples in eight appearances. He signed a five-year deal with Napoli in September, 2020, where he’ll be raking in €101,626 per week and €5,000,000 per year. 

 

5. Giannis Antetokounmpo 

Greek-Nigerian professional basketball player, Giannis Sina Antetokounmpo, had a great 2020 with his team, Milwaukee Bucks. He is the NBA’s reigning two-time Most Valuable Player (bagged the award 2019 and 2020). He also won the NBA Defensive Player of the 

Year award that same season and joined Hakeem Olajuwon and Michael Jordan as the only players to win it in the same season, making him the third player to achieve the feat in the league’s history. The 26-year-old, as per Basketball Reference,  finished the season 

with an all-time record for single-season NBA Player Efficiency Rating (PER) with 31.87. In December 2020, he signed a 5-year, $228 million dollar extension, the largest in league history. The deal also includes an opt-out in the fourth year. According to Forbes, he has 

a net worth of $47.6 million and earns around $19 million from his endorsement deals. Also, his major sponsors include 2K Sports, Hulu, and Nike. 



FIVE PRESENT SPORT HEROINES


1. Asisat Oshoala

Super falcons and FC Barcelona Femení star, Asisat Lamina Oshoala, has been an inspiration to women’s football in Nigeria, taking it to the world at large. Since her move to FC Barcelona Femení in January, 2019, she has been on fire, having a hand in 12 goals in 12 

appearances this season. The 26-year-old also has a foundation of her own called, “Foundation Football4girls Championship” and 2020’s edition took place from December 1 to 3. The tournament, sponsored by Emzor Pharmaceuticals in partnership with the Lagos 

State Sports Commission, is usually played as an eight-a-side competition in a knockout format for the grand prize of $1000.


2. Enku Ekuta

The Akwa Ibom born Judoka, Enku Ekuta, also had a great 2020 in her discipline. She won her first continental open gold medal in 2020 as she made Nigeria proud in the fourth African Judo Open. The African Judo Open took place in Dakar, Senegal, where she 

defeated the 2019 African Games champion, Helene Dombeu of Cameroun, in the final. Her victory in the final added 100 IJF world-ranking points to her profile as she continues to gather points to secure her qualification for the 2021 Summer Olympic Games, to 

hold in Tokyo, Japan.



FIVE PAST SPORT HEROES


1. Teslim  Balogun (Football)

Perhaps the most well-known Nigerian footballer of all time, for whom anecdotes and fireside tales have been crafted and told since the late 1940s. It is said that his shot was so thunderous it ripped open the stomach of a goalkeeper who stood in its way. Other 

rumours claim the goalkeeper was his brother and Balogun was so distraught he gave up football. In actual fact, Balogun won Nigeria's Challenge Cup five times in seven finals, was the first player to score a hat-trick in the competition, and was a member of Nigeria's 

UK Tourists in 1949, the precursor to the team which became known as the Red Devils, Nigeria's national team. They were later renamed the Green Eagles. After that UK tour, Balogun returned to England where he signed for Peterborough, becoming the first Nigerian 

to sign a professional football contract abroad. But he did not play for them and later signed for QPR, scoring three goals in 13 appearances. On retirement, he earned his badges and became the first African to qualify as a professional coach, leading Nigeria's team to 

the 1968 Olympic Games. The Teslim Balogun Stadium in Lagos is named after him.


2. Nwankwo Kanu (Football)

Nwankwo KanuKanu is one of the most naturally gifted football players to have come out of Africa. His football brain was on a different wavelength to his contemporaries and he proved his value by winning major titles everywhere he went. He finished as one of the most 

decorated African players in history, counting in his trophy cabinet the UEFA Champions League, UEFA Cup, Premier League, FA Cup, Dutch League title and Nigerian League title at club level, in addition to Olympic gold, the FIFA Under-17 World Cup title and Afro-Asia 

Cup. On an individual level, he was named African Player of the Year twice, and BBC African Player of the Year twice. As a youth international, he helped Nigeria win the FIFA Under-17 World Cup in 1993, and was promptly signed by Dutch giants Ajax Amsterdam from 

Nigeria's Iwuanyanwu Nationale, from where he moved to Inter Milan, then Arsenal, before joining West Brom and ending his career at Portsmouth, with whom he won his final trophy, scoring the winning goal in their 2008 FA Cup triumph. He captained Nigeria to that 

Olympic gold medal, scoring the winning goal in dramatic semifinal against Brazil. He finished as Nigeria's joint highest capped player with 86 international appearances before the record was broken and surpassed by Joseph Yobo and then Vincent Enyeama. Kanu was voted 

the 13th greater Arsenal player of all time.


3. Enefiok Udo-obong (Athletics)

Few who watched that race can forget Enefiok Udo-Obong's amazing long-bursting sprint to earn Nigeria a silver medal in the 4x400m relay at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sidney. That medal was later upgraded to gold after American Antonio Pettigrew admitted that he had 

cheated by using performance-enhancing drugs. The USA were disqualified and Nigeria awarded the gold medal. Udo-Obong went on to win a bronze medal at the same event four years later in Athens.


4. Stephen Keshi (Football)

Stephen KeshiFew players of Nigerian origin had the clout and influence that Keshi had on Nigerian and African football. As a player with NNB he won the WAFU Cup twice, before moving to Cote d'Ivoire where he won the League and Cup with Stade d'Abidjan and then 

Africa Sports. From there he moved to Belgian giants Anderlecht, winning one League title and two Cup titles. He became the longest serving Nigeria captain, leading the team to the African Nations Cup title in 1994 and qualifying for the World Cup that year, retiring with 

60 caps, then the second highest appearance of any Nigerian behind Muda Lawal. He returned as coach, winning Nations Cup bronze and qualifying for the 2002 World Cup as assistant to Shuiabu Amodu, then helping Togo qualify for the World Cup, before going on to become 

only the second former player to win Afcon as coach when he guided the Super Eagles to the title in 2013.


5. Austin Okocha (Football)

One of the most recognized faces of Nigerian sports in recent years, Okocha played briefly for Enugu Rangers before heading out to Germany, where he turned out for Eintracht Frankfurt and scored one of the greatest ever goals in Bundesliga history against Oliver Kahn. He 

moved to Turkey with Fenerbahce, on to PSG for a then African record transfer fee, before eventually moving to England with Bolton Wanderers. Okocha won the African Nations Cup in 1994, then claimed silver in 2000 and bronze in 2002, 2004 and 2006. He was part of the 

Super Eagles squad that qualified for a first ever World Cup, going on to represent Nigeria at the event in 1994, 1998 and 2002. He was named BBC African Player of the Year and controversially missed out twice on the African Player of the Year title. His greatest moment was 

helping Nigeria win Olympic gold in 1996.




FIVE PAST SPORT HEROINES


1. Mercy Akide (Football)

A second generation early trailblazer of women's football in Nigeria, Akide's skills and goalscoring for the Super Falcons made her the first truly globally recognized African women's football star. Two-time top scorer at the African Women Championship and three-time champion,

 she became the first ever African woman to earn a soccer scholarship to the USA, where she set a single season record of 49 goals with Milligan College in Tennessee, then became the first African to play professional football in the USA with San Diego Spirit. Akide also set a scoring

 record at the African Women Championships which was later broken, and was thrice named by FIFA into its All Star Selection. Akide represented Nigeria at three World Cups, two Olympic Games and three African Women's Nations Cups. She was named the first ever African 

Woman Footballer of the Year in 2000, a title she held until 2002, and has been inducted into both the Milligan College Hall of Fame, and the W-League Hall of Fame in the USA, the only African woman player to be so honoured. Currently a FIFA Ambassador and member of the 

FIFA Legends team.


2. Florence Omagbemi

Omagembi was the first female footballer to lead super falcons to four consecutive African women championships in 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004. The cool-headed midfielder generalissimo also features in four world cups. She was among the squad that participated in the 2000 Sydney 

Olympics. She became the first woman to win the African women championship as a player and coach after super falcons defeated indomitable lioness 1-0 in the final, which was played at Ahmadou Ahidjo stadium, Yaounde.


3. Falilat Ogunkoya

Fali, as she is fondly called, rubbed shoulders with some the world best in the 400 metres during her active years. She was highly tipped to win 400 meters gold at the 1996 summer Olympics in Atlanta, but she settled for the bronze behind Marie Jose Perec of France and Cathy 

Freeman of Australia. She is one of the most decorated female athletes in Nigeria with a record 14 career medals (6 gold, 6 silver, and 2 bronze). This African record holder, with a personal best time of 49.10s, is presently the Chairperson of South-West Athletics Federations.


4. Marian Usman

Weightlifting is one major sport that has brought laurels to Nigeria since independence. Marian Usman is one of few female weightlifters with good track records in the sports. This four-time African champion in the 75kg category deserves her place among Sports personalities 

that brought honours to Nigerian in the last 60 years. With Commonwealth Games gold medal in her cabinets, Marian featured in three Olympics Games where she gave a good account of herself by winning bronze in 2008.


5. Blessing Okagbare

Unarguably one of the greatest sprinters the African continent has ever produced, Okagbare has been a shining light in the last decade; winning all that counts in the track and field event. Her journey to stardom began at the 2008 Olympics where she surprised all including 

herself to win a silver medal in the long jump eventShe also has IAAF World Championships 200m bronze, Long Jump Silver, IAAF World Cup 100m bronze.Okagbare proudly owns the Nigerian 100m record at 10.79 seconds and 200m record at 22.04 seconds.






